Kurukunda, Bosmiya 
Aadi Kurukunda, Jeet Bosmiya
Mr. Smith
APUSH, Period 4
October 23, 2024


Jackson’s Impeachment: Other Vetoes
The presidential power of the veto, established in the Constitution, was created to support the checks outlined within each branch of the government and balance the individual branches’ powers. Done in order to prevent the delicate three-branch republic of the nation from crumbling, the constitutional pillar of checks and balances became a fundamental role in American governance. However, during the term of the seventh president, Andrew Jackson, the vital role of the veto was abused to ensure not the nation’s prosperity, but Jackson’s own presidential authority. Highlighted by his rampant use of his vetoing power, totaling more than all of his predecessors combined, Jackson worked against the separations of powers created in th        e Constitution, and rather in a tyrannical form not equivalent to the manner of a republic. He used his vetoes against laws, though supported (sometimes easily) by the elected representatives of the American people (Congress), for his own bias and retention of presidential power. Jackson’s vetoes emphasized his governance as one, not on behalf of the people, but on behalf of himself and his polit ical agenda. His strive for personal benefit during his administration, through vetoes, obliterated the three-branch foundation our government was built upon and set a dangerous precedent for the executive branch to become excessively powerful.                                          
When a President vetoes a bill, Congress possesses the ability to override Presidential authority. While unlikely to occur, this check embedded against the executive branch is possible to safeguard our government. However, there is an event that goes around congressional override of a veto, abused by Jefferson; the pocket veto. It is an indirect veto after Congress has adjourned, prompted by the president leaving the bill unsigned. By retaining a bill unsigned for 10 days, the bill would not only go unpassed but Congress would not be allowed to override the presidential “veto”(bill unsigned after Congress adjourned). Out of the twelve bills Jackson vetoed, seven of them were pocket vetoes (senate.gov).  Jackson’s overwhelming abuse of pocket vetoes further displayed Jackson’s willingness to leave his presidential authority unquestioned. Given the fact that more than a majority of his vetoes undermined Congressional authority to check against the executive branch, Jackson wanted to safeguard his power by completely disregarding the separation of powers during his administration.
Introduced in 1832, both houses of Congress passed the Light House Bill due to its perceived future of expanding economic growth and national prosperity. The act internally improved lighthouses and harbors, to profit from increased and efficient trading, as well as commercial interests for the country. However, Jackson vetoed this bill, on the stance of a limited federal government, in economics and otherwise. He argued, “The successful operation of the federal system can only be preserved by confining it to the few and simple, but yet important, objects for which it was designed” ( Jackson’s veto message, Lighthouse Bill 1832, American Presidency Project). To him, economically, the Federal government did not have an objective within an increased role in society, and frequently throughout his terms sided against internal improvements and infrastructure. Jackson’s disagreement with the bill also came through his belief that internal improvements, like the ones described in the bill, only affected local areas, rather than its purpose of improving the entire nation."The local advantages arising from the disbursement of public money too frequently, it is to be feared, invite appropriations for objects of this character that are neither necessary nor useful”(Jackson’s Lighthouse bill veto message 1832, American Presidency Project). His opposition, however, debated that increased infrastructure spending would help the country nationally, building up the US economy, and that Jackson’s rejection was completely unfounded. The truth to his opposition was that Jackson was preventing national growth for his own interests. Not mentioned in his public opposition to the bill was that most of the infrastructure improvements were set in the Industrial North, where Jackson happened to be less politically popular. His base for support derived in the non-industrial South, so in which to align with his base, rejected this bill purely on a political bias. Jackson, like much of the South, feared the rise of the Northern elite, bankers and industrialists, who stood to benefit from internal improvements. Jackson’s veto, in this specific instance, showcased his willingness to put his own political and personal interests and biases over the growth of the Nation.
During Jackson’s terms as president, his priorities were constantly laid on ensuring his presidential authority over the other branches of government. In 1835, Jackson vetoed an act relating to the international relations of the government, based on his belief that it was inconsistent with the separation of powers. He argued that “..the Executive has competent authority to negotiate about it for them with a foreign government--an authority Congress can not constitutionally abridge or increase”(Jackson’s veto message, American Presidency Project). In his reasoning, Jackson undermined Congressional authority in checking executive functions, particularly in foreign affairs. His unfounded interpretation of Congressional power went against the purpose of checks and balances, and a three-branch government, as well as proving to be hypocritical; seeing that Jackson was unprecedentedly accustomed to his vetoes, and executive authority over the Congress, but did not view Congressional checks against him in a similar light. Throughout his administration, Jackson worked against the Separation of powers, which was the basis for which he rejected this particular act, to increase the power of the executive branch, or in other words, himself. A three-branch government, where one branch strives for a greater extent of power, like Jackson’s administration, is not a government equivalent to a republic, but instead, it is on the verge of tyranny, like much opposition at the time accused him of (as referenced in the image below).
  



This cartoon issued in 1833, depicts President Jackson as a monarch, in response to his abuse of vetoes. The image showcases opposition to Jacksonian Democracy, as well as perceiving Jackson’s abuse of the presidential power as a tyrannical action (Iowa.gov).










Overall,  Jackson’s administration, through its abuses of power, outlines the reasoning in which the former president should have been impeached from office during his terms. As a leader of a republic needs to work on behalf of the people. As the evidence of his vetoing shows, Jackson’s ulterior motives were anything but for the people. His governance did not abide by the American principles in the Constitution, and his rule should not have lasted as long as it did. His vetoes, used for his own personal and political gain, made him unfit to lead, therefore impeachable.














Bibliography:


https://www.senate.gov/legislative/vetoes/presidents/JacksonA.pdf
Statistics used to show Jackson's overwhelming use of pocket vetoes to not face Congress over his abuse of the veto. Also, used to describe what a pocket veto is.


https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/andrew-jackson-event-timeline
Timeline of Jackson’s Administration used to showcase his vetoes and stances through the course of his terms.


https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/veto-message-pocket-veto
Jackson’s presidential veto message, when rejecting the 1832 Land Bill, citing his concerns and stances.


https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/documents/veto-message-474
Jackson’s veto message gave his stance on the separation of powers within the government and the role of the executive branch.


https://fastercapital.com/content/Veto-Power--The-Power-to-Veto--Understanding-the-Executive-s-Authority.html
General information on the Presidential power of the veto.


https://history.iowa.gov/history/education/educator-resources/primary-source-sets/caucuses-and-elections/king-andrew-first
 Cartoon of Andrew Jackson, showing him as a tyrant. Used to showcase opposition to Jackson at the time, to further explain our impeachment stance against him.